Press record.
Not by my phone, that would be bad.
So today is Wednesday the 31st of May 2023.
My name is Paul Hunt from Man Cap Cymru and could you introduce yourself please?
Yeah, my name is Janet Kensch and I'm a committee member and a volunteer with Man Cap Cymru.
So how did you get started with Man Cap Cymru again?
It was when we moved back here to West Wales.
I was born and bred in West Wales, well actually where I live now is about five minutes from where I was brought up in Sanderville.
I moved to Cardiff to do some work and then oh gosh I was there for, I had my two children and came back here with the whole family.
Back in 2001, because we were always looking for services for my daughter's school or any discipline.
We were looking at different organisations and got involved with Man Cap Ceredigion.
That was 22, 23 years ago.
On the basis of knowing what was available.
I found out that Man Cap Ceredigion didn't really do anything for children.
They were basically concentrated adults, which would have meant me walking away from them really because it didn't benefit Beth.
But I was talked into staying and getting involved with committee work and was on that committee then for a while.
So how old is Beth?
She's now 30 this year. She was born in 92, so she'll be 31 this year.
So you spent some time in Cardiff?
She was born in 92, I lived in Bathy. She was born in Llandoc Hospital.
It took us a few years to get some, well actually we've never had a diagnosis, a proper one.
But obviously we knew she had a learning disability when she was about two.
We'd looked at Swansea at that time, then we had Alcanson, Dylan, her brother.
So we pretty much knew when she was about two or three that she would have some difficulties.
And how easy was it to find services there compared to Ceredigion?
Just as difficult really. I can remember the time where the nurse, the district nurse, whatever you want to call her,
in the doctor's surgery saying, we haven't assessed, but yeah, it sounds like she'll need help.
And I can remember thinking, right, let's see what help is out there.
And sat in, we had a little library place in the house with a phone and desk.
And I thought, right, let's start, darling. And started bringing people up.
And they then would pass me on to somebody else, to another organization, so I did that.
And I suddenly realized that it was going to be very difficult to find support or help or advice,
because during that hour, I followed all the places I was led to and came back to the first person I spoke to.
So there was a lot of agencies out there, but no concrete support in any way.
And this is in Swansea now, all well-meaning and everything, but nothing with practical support.
Then we got social services involved, and that meant loads of assessments.
And I mean loads, and they'd be coming to the house, a social worker, a nurse, a psychologist or something else.
And they'd come to the house and they'd be asking you the same questions.
And you'd think, oh, God, can you read the file before you came?
And I felt like somebody said, well, what you should do is record, like we're recording today,
record everything and just say to them, look, I'll go make the coffee while you listen to the recording.
Because, you know, it was just repeating itself.
But no, it was very little support, really.
But then you don't know often what support you need either.
Now, that's what I found difficult.
But we were there then for a few years and then we decided we...
She started a little school in Townhill, which was really lovely, Townhill School.
A lot of people very snobbish about that.
We tried to get into a Welsh school and they said, I'll never forget this Dr Tanimie in Singleth Hospital.
Well, you know, you'd probably best stick to just teaching her English because, you know, when she grows up,
there won't be many people speaking Welsh.
She'll be able to support herself.
You know, it was best to...
And I regret that, really regret it, because, you know, she could have handled two languages easily.
But anyway, she went to Townhill School, lovely school.
And then we decided to come back home.
And it meant going through the whole process again, if you like.
But there was a difference, really.
There was a really good children's department or whatever you want to call it.
I think it was in Pembroke.
And the person who led it was Errol Bray.
She's retired now, but I think she's still involved with a lot of stuff in the area.
And she had this unit there.
And they were really, really good.
They had a good record.
They set up a good respite system, although we never used it ourselves.
They were involved with DASH, which was a parent led organisation that did holiday things.
They took over these schools and you could come along.
And, you know, kids and the siblings as well, you know, would be in little groups and stuff.
They did some respites in Teetlin, in Ketting near Aberaerhe.
Where people could, again, Bethan didn't take part in that.
But, you know, your child could go there for a week and enjoy just being with other people.
For the purposes of the tape, I should probably just say there's a gigantic dog sniffing around.
Which is not mine, by the way.
So as a unit, they were really, really good.
But again, it was limited what they could do as well, really.
But going back to my captain together, it's very limited what they could do because they were only really looking at adults.
But I always used to think, well, I'm glad I did get in contact with them because, you know,
while your child is a child with a learning disability up until 18 to 25, you know,
there's a duty for supporting them, you know, educationally and social services wise.
And getting involved in that kind of thing highlighted how different it was basically as an adult with disabilities,
because that duty goes out through the window, really.
What you're entitled to as an adult with an disability is totally different to the child.
So it was as much a shock to me then.
Well, I sort of planned ahead for Bethan as being an adult, knowing there wouldn't be anything really for her.
Far, far less than the support and services that she had as a child.
Growing up in Kheriteekyon as a child with disabilities was great for Bethan.
She was lucky to be in Chandisil Primary School.
They were very, very good.
She went to an excellent secondary school in Newcastle Emily,
even if they're headed by Helen Ling.
So, you know, her childhood and her upbringing was good compared to a lot of people I know.
I had a tough time with her, really.
I think we might have to pause and get the dog out because I think the breathing is going to be coming on the recording.
Oh, pause it. No, no, no, no. Pause it.
So we're recording again just to get rid of the dog.
So how did you feel when you first found out that Bethan had a learning disability?
Oh, God, I don't know. I've had to confuse her more than anything.
The thing was that Bethan was born and a lot of my friends are having kids at the same time.
So she looked healthy. She looked beautiful, you know, to look at.
But there were milestones that she wasn't compared to my friend's kids.
So she would be walking at the same time as them, not talking at the same time as them.
I can remember thinking, saying, well, you know, your child should have a hundred words, you know, for that.
She was nowhere near that.
But the main thing we noticed was her socialization, you know, where the other kids were starting to after about six months,
noticing other children and getting involved or playing with things. Bethan wasn't like that, really.
And it took a while to convince doctors and nurses that I thought there was something wrong, you know.
They'd say, oh, well, you know, children, they take a while.
You know, she'll catch her, you know, in all this business. And she didn't.
And I think once I was told, yeah, you might be right here, I thought, no, thank God I've got something right.
Let's, you know, and I think there was a sense of or a mixture of relief or, I don't know,
just the sense of that, you know, now we can get on with doing something about it.
But as a parent, you will always have these feelings of great sadness and grief.
And, you know, depending on how severe that disability is, you know,
they will be doing other things that your friends' kids will be doing, like, you know,
going to university or getting married or having children.
And I think those milestones still hit you and you get quite emotional about it.
But I'm lucky that, you know, I'm quite positive about Beth.
She's quite an unique girl in her ways.
And because of that, I'd always be positive that she's beautiful and I can't think of her in any other way.
So, I, you know, I can't say I was upset, might be the wrong word, or hurt or whatever.
But with me, it was a battle just getting on with it and making sure that she was happy, content and safe.
And I think it changed my view of how to be a parent and how what I wanted for my children,
because I think if Beth hadn't been around, I would have been one of these pushy parents,
you know, quite ambitious for them and push them to do this.
Whereas I'm far more relaxed and I'm certainly more relaxed with Dylan about, you know,
what he's wanted to do in his life and that, you know, the mantra is as long as they're happy and safe.
That's it, you know, and that's all I want for them.
But yeah, so that's that was basically how I felt.
A lot of the Mencap groups were set up to provide social opportunities for people with a disability.
Having had a son without a disability to start with, what were the differences in terms of those opportunities?
What? Between Beth and Dylan?
Yes.
Massive, massive.
We suddenly found out with Dylan how easy it was to bring up a child and go through those milestones.
Having with Dylan, you know, he potty trained himself really, basically.
He'd go to sleep at normal times. He'd eat what, you know, there wasn't any issues about feeding or anything.
He'd socialize with other children, go off and play and stuff.
So there's a massive difference between Beth and the other.
But what was lucky about us having Dylan as a second child was that Bethan seemed to speed up on her progression.
She started speaking a lot faster and, you know, her mind stones were a bit faster getting through,
knowing that Dylan basically was forcing her to catch up.
I mean Dylan would, you know, whereas with us, it would take us a little time to coach Bethan to say things and whatever.
Dylan would demand it, you know, come on Bethan, let's go, you know.
And it's been like that through the night really.
And to today now, he's a great support with her, very defensive.
And, you know, we'll look after her forever, I believe.
But what it's also done for Dylan is that he's been a better person for it, I think,
because I know headmaster was telling me about him in primary school.
One thing about Dylan is if there's a child who starts is new, starting,
or there's a child who's sad or being bullied or finding it difficult,
Dylan's always the one to suss it all out or to go towards the child and support them in a way, be friendly and comfort them and so forth.
And that is because he's been Bethan's brother, you know.
And because of that, I think that's why he's gone into the field of supporting Mencap Ceredigion himself, you know.
He supports us with all the social stuff that we do and all the workshops and stuff like that, and they love him.
But, you know, he treats them as equals.
He treats them as friends and, you know, lives them dearly.
But the other thing is, I think, that he's gone into teaching now is again because he's the type that wants to support and help.
And that I truly believe that's because, you know, he's had a system of him, just probably.
So back to Mencap Ceredigion, how did you first become aware of them?
Well, again, by ringing when we came back to West Wales, we had all these organizations, you know, getting a list of stuff and just ringing.
And I got to meet the chair who's an amazing man, Bill Thompson, who'd been a chair.
He's now passed away.
And Mencap in those days were a bit different to what Mencap Ceredigion was different to what it is today.
And those Mencap Ceredigion in those days were far more involved with the provision of services and supported housing.
They owned a few houses in the county and they employed, trained, you know, they were, you know, ran those supported housing issue.
And Bill Thompson was a great one for, I think he was ex service.
I think he was either Navy or, you know, one of these God through the war titles, you know, Sergeant Major, but such a gentle, lovely gentleman, you know.
And he'd kept the ship together and sort of set up all of these things, respite, supported housing, services, social clubs and all of that.
So it was all very, very well set up and everything when I got involved.
He was very well respected by the professionals as well, by the authorities, you know, and well liked by the members.
And I think one of the nicest letters, I have a few letters that have been given to me in my life from, you know, people I've worked with when I've left, they've sent me a nice letter to see it by, you know.
But the one I treasure the most is from him that he sent because I had to leave Mencap Ceredigion for some reason.
Because I was concentrating on some work issues and I said to him, look, you know, I won't be able to do so much.
And one of the letters I treasure the most is the letter he sent me.
And it's there and I often now read a bit when you know you think, oh God, you know, it's getting too much.
You know, you get your bad days and you read that letter and it makes you feel really good, you know.
He was he was an amazing man and he was the lead of a big, you know, quite a set of quite strong committee members made up of parents.
And they ran everything really basically until Mencap, Cymru came along or Mencap National.
I can't remember the name. Sintje.
Clive. No, that's the guy who came down to do the transitional bit of Mencap Ceredigion, giving the houses.
Howard. Howard Sintje. Yes. Clive is the guy that invented the seat, the bikes.
Howard Sintje. And I remember he came to the Feathers Hotel to have a meeting with us and to reassure us that we were doing the right thing, really.
But I didn't get involved with that so much.
And I think the transition was quite small because the authorities helped it a lot.
And there was some housing associations as well.
And we have today supported housing in the county that are managed out by Mencap and by MIRAS.
But they wouldn't be what they are without Bill Thompson and that committee.
They set it up. It was like fine.
You know, really well looked after, well managed.
So it's quite easy to just pick it up and go.
What was the reason that they transferred over to?
I don't know what it was. I think I don't know because I wasn't involved with it at the time.
Whether it was because the parents were getting quite elderly now and it was a lot for them.
And I mean, every organization will find this. It's hard to get people on board committees and being trustees.
There's a lot of responsibility nowadays for that, whether it was that or whether and this is my guess,
whether it was the legislations and so forth and the amount of liability the authorities had,
whether it was better for them to get involved with it really.
And so Mencap then was involved with the whole thing of support and services and education and living accommodation and everything.
To what we are today, which is something totally different and is run totally differently as well.
But he was an amazing man and we were very, very lucky to have him in Ceredigion.
We were very lucky to have the committee as well.
You've mentioned that when you joined Mencap Ceredigion didn't do much with younger people.
Were there any other young people of members or were the parents similar age to you when you first joined?
No, they were a lot older than me, the parents, because obviously their kids were adults.
My child was a child. But the great thing about it was though, better than getting involved with all the activities.
If we had a disco, I'd bring the kids along. So the committee got to know them very, very early on.
But what was really great is that my child, my children were getting to know the adults with their disabilities.
So I was learning what it was going to be like in the future. And so did Beth and Dylan.
And now Beth and Dylan are friends with these adults who are now obviously in their 50s and 60s.
So they know them as friends now. It is literally like a family.
We know them all. We know their parents. We know what they had for breakfast, what their favorite things are.
And I think the one thing that with Mencap Ceredigion is, and they're probably the same with other branches in Wales,
and something that people don't realize or need to realize and need not to forget is that with Mencap Ceredigion,
we are the only constant in their lives from the time they come on board as adults when they're 18, 29, to the time they die.
Because they will have support workers coming and going. Social workers will come and go. Doctors, nurses, teachers, you name it, whatever.
They'll come and go. But with Mencap Ceredigion, we're pretty much there because we don't change in any way.
We're the same committee, we're the same parents, we're the same members. Nothing changes.
So I think that's quite a good thing about our organization.
And for Beth and until then, they've got people that they've known, like the members I know, that we see coming to Gateway and to all the events that we hold.
I've known them for nearly 25 years. So there's a certain element of trust and knowledge, which in effect is really, really important when you're planning on what we do as a service now.
We're able to listen to them and understand them more than anybody really, besides their own family and friends, obviously.
But certainly we know them more than a social worker. And that's not being disrespectful to the social worker, but that's just being practically honest.
They're not going to know what people are like after knowing them for 25 years compared to knowing them from a file for five minutes.
How did you gradually, your role with Mencap Cairdigan gradually change over the years? Because you're the chair now, is that?
No, I wasn't the chair. I was going, you know, the lead of that.
My half-goals are out to chairs, you know, deputy chairs, secretaries, treasurers, I don't know if all we say.
I came on board really with another lady who was involved with Mencap Cairdigan then, and that was Karen Blower.
We were both the same age, the same. We like the same thing, we got quite friendly.
And our job really was to organize all the discos.
But we were new onto that committee and much as I loved all the committee members, oh, they were all fashioned about their attitude to people with learning disabilities.
I mean, we had to bring them up to the 20th century.
You know, a lot of stuff had happened since, you know, 1983 with the new legislation and, you know, the turn of the century with education and, you know, the Education Act.
But they seemed to rule so back in the 1960s.
And although we lived them to bits, Karen and I had to work really hard.
You know, we used to give money out to organizations.
And one of the things that I think was Kenal and Stiff and the Day Center in Lampeter for people with disabilities wanted a computer.
So they sent us a letter to the committee and we then had a discussion.
And most of the committee members were aghast with a computer.
What do you mean a computer? People with disabilities don't use computers.
But what do you do? They're silly, ridiculous.
And we had to really fight hard to convince our committee that actually, yeah, you know, and of course today with phones,
I've had members come to me and I'll say, because I'm not technical, as you know, and I'll give them the phone saying, well, how do I do this, actually?
Or, you know, you surf or whoever it is.
And they'll take the phone off me and they'll sort they've sorted it out.
So technically, our members are really up there, especially with social media, perhaps there's a bit too much in social media.
But it was difficult. I can remember one instance.
We were organizing it.
It was our first goal at organizing Christmas Disco in TGN.
And I was at Lampeter University.
Can't remember either one.
And we were dealing with the menu.
And we decided that we'll have chicken and, you know, and these chicken, they can't have chicken.
They just have sausage and chips.
Why? Well, it's easy to cut it up for them.
And I would look at each other and this is from another era, you know.
So but we won that time.
We got them chicken and, you know, proper dinner that they could cut themselves.
I think so.
We were in it.
You know, it was you could see the generation gap there.
Really big time.
And I'm not sure.
I think Bill Thompson was with us, you know, he said, Oh, yeah, I get you.
I get you.
But a lot of the committee members were really stuck in, you know, the the the old fashioned way of looking after all the awareness of people in those days.
So.
How they pushed back on some of those things and definitely.
I can remember talking to them about the development of cardiac and other have a gateway and that what has that started back 60 years ago again through Mencap.
You know, these tech gateways, so they still do.
We still do.
But in those days, it was if you walked into a room, it would be the children and talking children in their 40s, 50s with the mums, the mums were knitting and the children do the jigsaws.
That was his social life.
And they used to call it the knitting club because the mums would bring their knitting along.
Those attitudes have totally changed now.
I mean, our social clubs now, whereas they used to be run and many of them still do in day centers, we purposely took them out to the day centers because we wanted them to be in the community.
So our I know that our business is a bit difficult because I've been running separate to us and they have it in a football club or whatever.
Not in a running club because there's a lot of security in the way.
But the ones that we've set up in.
It's our South.
It's like Cardigan.
Now is a Cardigan Castle Cafe.
Again, with the community, the one in Upper Vyland.
That one is a bit difficult.
We're in a hole for that one.
But the one in Newcastle, Emlyn is in a pub.
The one we're going to be setting up soon in Fentasil.
That's going to be a pub.
Purposely because we're in the community and what we found is that the community are now getting involved with us.
Last Saturday, we had a meeting in the Three Compasses Net here in Newcastle, Emlyn and they did a buffet for us and we brought our music system with us, which is the best thing we've ever bought.
We had microphones and we were all listening to music in the beer garden, dancing and everything.
And all of a sudden the locals are coming out and joining in.
We've got a video of them all dancing with us and a group had come up for the weekend from Swansea and they joined in.
We had the microphones and we were all singing like karaoke and we were getting raffles because of the fundraiser.
I don't know if it was 20 or 30 but they said, no, keep it clear.
They had a fortune on it.
But what was good was that the community was involved with us and we were involved with the community in front of you.
And I think that's, if you're asking for the difference between what it was like and what it is now, that's a very big positive as far as our members can see.
All the different communities being with the groups that you take into cafes.
Absolutely. Well, think of it this way.
People want to be kind.
There are more good people than bad people as Ros Angus said.
There are more people there who want to help you than want to turn their backs.
So you want to take advantage of that really.
But on the business side of it, can you imagine when we went to Newcastle Ebelin, the Cardigan one, the Aberyne one was getting too full.
So we went to Cardigan to decant to some of the world and we opened one in Cardigan.
That was getting too full.
So we then opened one in Newcastle Ebelin.
And I can remember going through Newcastle Ebelin, which in its day was a pub town really.
We had about 26 pubs in it in those days.
It's not so much that now.
But going around with pubs to see whether we could open some sort of...
And everybody was really, yeah, yeah, yeah, they'd love it.
But what we went for, we went there on a Wednesday night, I'll never forget, and the pub was empty midweek.
Nothing happens in midweek.
And there were fewer locals in there, I think very much.
And it was the three campuses and we looked and it was ideal.
It had a snooker table. Great.
It was an area to dance.
There was a place to eat.
A beautiful beer garden.
And Wednesday was a quiet night.
So we had a word with Pete and Jill.
They said, yeah, great.
If you want, we'll do some food and we'll welcome them.
So we had a problem.
So now tonight, there's going to be a gateway there.
There's going to be about 30, 40 people there.
Every one of them will be eating.
They'll probably spend a good tenner with drinks and everything.
So it's gone from a pub with a couple of locals down on a Wednesday night to a pub that's heaving.
And what's good about it is that the locals knowing there'll be a disco,
there'll be something on during the night.
It's a pop pool. It's a busy pub, precise pub.
We'll go there.
So the locals, we're actually helping commercially as well.
And that goes for all the other gateways that we've got in the community.
So it benefits the town as well, really.
The Premier Shop next door tells me they make a bomb on a Wednesday night.
And then I say, why is that?
Well, of course, we do a Rathford, don't we?
And they're all in there, our lot, buying sweets.
We've been told off about that before now that we shouldn't be raffling off sweets.
But anyway, that's what the members want.
And they make a bomb on these sweets they buy and bring the bars of chocolates or box of chocolates.
They make a mark in an increase in profits.
What would have happened if you'd suggested taking people to the pub when you first joined Bank of Carid again?
I don't know. I think they would have been concerned.
Because with their gateway, you know, bingo.
We do bingo. They love the bingo.
But only one game takes about 10 minutes, not the whole night.
And then they go to a restaurant once a month or something.
Nothing wrong with that. But our members now, people with disabilities, they're expecting more out of us.
You know, they want to work. Some don't want to work, but some do.
Some want to study more. Some want to socialize more.
Some want to travel. Some want to have a romantic relationship.
Some want to get married.
You know, they're, they're what they want nowadays is a lot more than what it was, I mean, you know, 30, 40 years ago.
So you as an ACORUS then, as a charity, you've got to, you know, it's member led.
They are the ones that tell us what to do.
Like tonight, this morning it was on Facebook.
Oh, what are we doing tonight, Jan? I don't know. What do you want to do?
You know, it's not we'll do this or any other.
So then we spend a fortune on pub, garden games, you know, like Giant Connect 4s and Giants.
Games and the garden. So we're, we're, I danced like, but outside.
Yeah. And it's their choice. It's their side, you know.
That's the difference. Big difference. When you joined, would you say?
No, I don't think it was. No.
I mean, I think things have changed, not as a main category, but things have changed because of the different acts.
Like advocacy, self-advocacy, we're teaching our members now to have a voice.
We're teaching people to listen to those voices.
Nothing without us, to take gratitude. It's there.
That makes it a lot easier for us because they can, we'll organize it for them, but we don't have to think about what to do.
They'll tell us what to do.
I think as long as they listen, people listen to them, then, then, you know, we'll be okay.
But there's still a lot of people out there whose attitude is, you know, for them.
Was it something that happened gradually becoming member led or was it just happened over time?
It was a gradual thing as we were concerned.
We still had people who didn't quite understand, were not very peace-tee about things.
So it took a while. And there's still a battle sometimes.
In fact, I often think with the situation we're in at the moment with a lot of cuts and the service has been cut back and stuff like that,
that we are getting back to that.
So there's a big, big danger of getting back to the old days where, you know,
it's whatever money you've got, that's what you get.
And we're not listening to other people as much as to looking at money, vice versa.
How easy has it been for your members of the learning disability to get used to leading the organization and making decisions?
That's a hard one, really.
I mean, we had a self-applicacy group in Kennedy, Cuncone, Kennedy Dump People's Fellows, and that finished.
And we were left to know with no advocacy service, self-application, because there wasn't any advocacy service.
But legislation has changed, not for the better, I'm afraid.
So Mencak Kennedy decided that we'd set up our own self-advocacy group.
And it was called, the members called it our voice, our choice.
And we helped it for a while, facilitated it, helped them with meetings, administrations, stuff like that, until they were set up.
And we consciously then let them go.
Because one thing with self-advocacy, it has to be independent of any other organization, any other service, because otherwise it won't work.
And we were really, really big on that.
But it is difficult to get them to run the meeting effectively.
So you still need to support them.
But it has to be that it's supporting them and not doing it for them.
And that's been a really difficult transition, especially if you're somebody like me.
I like to be in control of stuff.
And I, you know, I blame myself a lot where I'd be in the meeting and I'd say, oh, you don't do it that way.
You do it this way, you know, and then I'm trying to have the hands off.
It's more my problem, I think, than their problem.
Because on Saturday they had a meeting and I would stick myself out of the chair and I'd be like, I'm not saying a word and keep your mouth.
And you know what? They ran it fine.
So I think there's a bit of confidence in letting them get on with it, but be there to be supportive and not be doing it.
So Mencap-Carradiguan is separate to Mencap-Cumbria.
What's that relationship been like in the last 20 years?
It's been an odd one, really, to be honest with you, because first of all, it's difficult for people outside that don't know us to differentiate the two.
And I think they have to, to be honest, because we do two different things, as far as I'm concerned.
Mencap-Carradiguan is a branch, very small branch, of volunteers.
Mencap-Cumbria is a charity and it's throughout Wales.
And we're not the same in as much. We have the same ideals.
We have the same hopes and so forth for our members.
We support them in the same way, but we do two different things.
So that was difficult for me because I.
I thought of them as two separate things in as much one fighting the other for the same thought, if you know what I mean.
And that was hard for me, especially funding wise.
There were a couple of issues that really I wasn't happy about where, for instance, if somebody did a will.
And it was somebody died and it was somebody in Cairnicuon.
The money that that will was going to was going to Cardiff.
So we we didn't get a look in. So there's a lot of that going on.
But I don't know. And we work really, really closely now.
I think we've got a really good positive relationship.
Wayne is very supportive of the work that we do.
As is he's supportive of all the other branches and you yourself, Paul and all the other staff always at the end of the phone.
The the the head office, you know, in Kidaminsters, where the main office is.
Peter Brands. There's another.
Oh, there's there's nothing.
That they won't do for you if you want to get free T-shirts or you want some advice on, you know, volunteering at shows or
insurance or stuff like that. They're there.
And I think as a small branch, you need that big brother support.
Do you know what I mean? But at the same time, Wayne's really good in letting us get on with this as well.
As long as what we do is legal. I don't think he's bothered.
But, you know, he's really, really supportive.
And it seems like, you know, one of the things I do find with being in West Wales,
big gripe with me is everything is happening in Cardiff, you know.
Well, if if if a charity is an all Wales charity, they should be covering all of Wales.
You know, they get the funding to support all of Wales.
But you often find all of these charities are based in Cardiff and all the money is drifted over to Cardiff.
Whereas we make a pit with Medcap. They very much I feel and I see anyway that they spread their resources across Wales.
They spread their funding, if possible, across Wales and all their projects and all their people.
I mean, now we've got a development officer, Rod Drews, who lives in Llandronddol that comes westward.
I've never had that before.
And, you know, I think I think we're quite lucky as a branch to be associated with Medcap as a whole.
And, you know, to recognize, well, respect and charity.
Plus, we've got our supported housing as well here, half of which are covered by Medcap as well.
So, you know, we've got a strong base in Cardiff.
I know a lot of other counties don't even have a branch.
But, you know, we're I think it's quite a good outfit where the national, regional and branch works really, really well together.
Could you tell me a little bit about the Comic Con?
Comic Con, we as a branch, the fingers in lots of pies, you know, we have a gateway, we have a swimming swimming group,
we've got gardening, artwork, Sunday lunch clubs, all sorts of things.
But my daughter was really, really interested in a lot of our members in animation, anime, Disney and other Japanese stuff.
And she used to love dressing up and going to what you call them Comic Cons, you know, conventions where you dress up and so forth.
I wish I'd taken her to London and stuff. I remember taking her to one in The Hex article, one of these big places anyway.
Excel Center.
Excel Center. And I can remember going in there and she was dressed up, I wasn't.
And I felt really, really standing out, you know, I was in normal clothes and everybody else was dressed up.
And it's a massive place. And there's this big room in there.
And they were all collecting something or other, bits, thousands.
And somebody said to me, there's 80,000 people in this room, all dressed up.
And I know that there's only 75,000 living in Keredikyo. We could have filled the whole of Keredikyo.
And there's a massive, massive different things to do with animation.
But what I noticed was an awful lot of people with learning disabilities and autism were really keen.
Why, I don't know, but there's a massive following.
And Bethan used to go to all these places.
And I've said there's only two places that I have seen Bethan, which I would say she fits in.
She's like a normal person, if there's such a word as normal.
And that's Disneyland Paris, Disneyland in Florida and any convention.
Right. And they fit in.
And I remember Bethan, we were driving back from London and she said to all these journeys,
can we not have one in Wales? Can we not have one in Keredikyo?
I said, what? A convention? Yeah.
I said, oh, yeah, I suppose we could.
And we said, yeah, that'd be a great idea.
Nothing ever happened.
And there's this one particular like, we were in Cardigan, I'll never forget, Cardigan Gateway.
And there was a support worker there, it was new and I'd never seen her before.
And Bethan hooked up to this support worker and there was disco and dancing and they were talking together.
And they were really into each other type of thing.
And I spoke to her and her name was Rowan.
And she said, oh, Bethan's fascinating. I love anime, she said.
And she and Bethan had this t-shirt on with some anime remark that any serious, serious anime person,
no one else knew about it but an anime person.
And she was attracted to that t-shirt.
And it turned out that Rowan, not only had she been to Japan, where Bethan would love to go to,
she'd actually gone to university in Japan to study animation.
And she was actually involved with wild films on a part-time basis as well.
So she was doing a bit of support work and she was involved in that.
And what developed out of that was Rowan and Bethan, Hannah, who was another support worker,
who was a brilliant artist and animator, and Jake, who is a well-known,
Jake Wittaker is a well-known filmmaker in County, teamed up, the four of them,
and they set up Kennedy County Animation Group.
And with that group, they meet up on a regular basis and they've made good three, four, five films, animated films.
During Covid, they were having Zoom meetings every week.
And not only are members in Kennedy County, but people from Cardiff, Bridgend, Pembrokeshire,
and they meet up on Zoom and they're brilliant artists as well.
And they do an awful lot of work together. And they've had some awareness days.
They've had some workshops in Cardigan, Small World Theatre and everything.
And we got some money from Wild Films and Film Company to actually have a convention.
And so we had the first convention and about three or four hundred people came along to it.
We'd made two films for it. We're actually in the Aberystwyth Arts Centre.
We had the next one then on the 28th of March. I'll never forget it. 2020 or 2019. When was Covid? 2020.
And that was the week that Kennedy had decided to do a lockdown. We did it a week before, actually.
And I'd bethoned on the computer telling everybody that we had to cancel.
But we had ours about two months ago. We've got loads of people coming along.
And we're now determined, unless we've got another Covid, to do it on a manual basis.
Is it just people with a learning disability coming to the convention?
Most are, yeah. But no, there are people there as well who are just interested in animation.
And it's working with universities and other agencies.
But I can see it being a lot, lot bigger than what it is. But it's just getting there slowly.
What was the impact of Covid on the organisation?
Crikey. That was a big shock to us because everything came to a stop. It wasn't a gradual stop. It was a stop.
So all our social clubs couldn't meet.
So we, within a week, decided, and we were probably one of the first, to use social media.
I found out about Zoom. Never heard of Zoom before. Still don't quite understand how it works, but anyway.
And very, very quickly, we were using FaceTime. We got a lot of volunteers along.
And we did things with our members. Things like Monday night was a quiz night.
Wednesday, Saturday, comedy nights. Everyone had to come along with a joke.
Marks had a ten. We had Friday coffee morning. Then we had things like Keep Fit.
We could have volunteers that did Keep Fit with them. We did some cooking. We didn't do much cooking actually. We could have done more.
We had Tom, Tom Evans, who is a writer. He's got a relative with learning disabilities.
And he wrote a whole book, if you like. And he read, he wrote it and read it every single day of the lockdowns.
Every day. And other people did, I mean, Rihanna, for instance, she used to do the competition of the week where she'd take a photo of a jar with jelly beans in it.
And you had to guess how many. So on a Monday, you'd have the picture and then people would be sending in their guessing, you know.
And the next week would be a box of pencils. How many pencils? Things like that.
They would get involved with that sort of thing. And then we got a pop group Dunlom was friends with.
And the lead singer did a Nightwake, sang all the songs from the group.
And we had George from Captain Entertainment having discos.
And we were really, we were fat, I used to say, and busy an hour with them when we were before Covid.
But the other thing that we did as well was we were on the other side of the phone.
If people were in need of any help, and we would refer, like if people couldn't get to a shop or something like that, we could ring the authorities and get them to a food bank or whatever.
So there was that link. But what we were conscious of was that not many people, people who weren't on social media, how were they coping?
We were disappointed, I have to say, with some of the supported housing organizations not being supportive and getting their members on social media.
Every house has got a computer stuck in their office. That's a problem.
But there was nobody, I can remember one support worker telling me, I don't agree with social media.
I think it's terrible that they can, you know, can all sort of problems. I don't really care what you think.
I want that person on Facebook. He's able to do it. I want you to support it. And as it was, you have to.
But I think the worst thing about Covid for certain people who weren't in contact with us through social media or Zoom was they missed their friends.
You know, a lot of people think people with disabilities, you know, they're not really good at communicating or socializing or, you know, they don't have eye contact.
So how can they make friends and have, you know, all of this business?
But actually, they are the most social people in the world and they really, really missed Gateway.
There was one person who used to ring me every week. I know what he said to me on the other side of the phone was,
When is the Christmas disc of? When is the Gateway? When is, when am I going to see my friends and stuff?
And they were breaking their hearts because they could, they just didn't have a social life.
And I always think, and I see these policies coming from the World Trade Assembly, you know, supporting people to go to work,
whether they like it or not, they're going to be supposed to go to work or supporting people to live independently, to cook, to pay their bills.
I know it's a different things, but there's very, very little.
I was hoping they'd learn from the Covid situation, fairly little about social life.
And they are allowed, they have a right to have a social life.
But there's very little provision out there for a social life, supporting people to go out, not just go to the pub.
I've seen support workers taking people for a coffee. Going for a coffee seems to be a big thing.
But the thing about socialising, helping them to get to know other people, for instance, that's what we aim to do with our gateways.
And we, you know, a social worker who sits next to a person in one of our gateways and they don't get involved with their client or other people.
They're there on their phones. We take a photo of them and we show them it.
So this is not the way to support people. So we encourage our social workers and support workers.
And they do to not only get involved with the clients, but also get involved with the whole group so the client can get to know people, be friendly, you know, socialise.
And they get a lot more out of their social events by doing that, really.
They missed it over coffee.
And then I think we're getting really upset.
But I tell you, the first gateway part of the plant, I mean, there were tears, you know, there were just hugs.
Although we weren't supposed to hug, we were.
But that was the first time we had was really emotional, which just goes to show that people with disabilities can, you know, have certain relationships that are really important to them.
When lockdown ended and things got back to normal, did things for Mencap Cairdegon get back to normal straight away or?
We really wanted to get back straight away into normality.
There were legislations that stopped us to do it as fast as we could do, I suppose.
You know, we had to have our meetings outside instead of inside and all of this business.
We had to have masks. We had to do this, we had that, which, you know, made life a little bit difficult.
But I would say within a month we were back to normal.
Were the members back to normal?
Yeah, to a certain degree, I think.
I think it took them a bit of time, you know, with wearing the masks and the worry of COVID and, oh, we can't touch or, you know, things like that.
And especially support workers who worked for agencies who were very strict about, you know, wearing the mask for a lot longer than they needed to or couldn't sit next to people.
Their regulations were quite strict, really.
Whereas we were more laid back, I suppose, more maverick, more in your face, which makes it more disappointing that a lot of agencies now, certainly the authorities, are still not back to normal.
The day centres are still not open.
And we're talking three years now.
The offices are still not manned.
You know, now if I want to get in contact with somebody in social services, I've got to go through the reception area.
They take my telephone number or my email address and then that person will come back to me.
And I know that person is working from home, which often means the baby's crying in the background or the dog is barking.
You know, my computer's down, my computer's next door, I can't, oh dear, dear, dear, dear, dear.
You know, things have not gone back to normal and it'll take a while, I think.
People have been given choices of working from home, which I think is good because, you know, environmentally it's good.
But they need to be making sure that the service doesn't change and the people that are working from home are actually working in a place that can be adapted into a working area.
And I don't think that's been done.
And I think we're missing out on services certainly because of that and the way services are run at the moment.
So they're far, far slower to get back to normal.
But as far as we're concerned, as if COVID never happened really.
So finally, been at Mencap Coyote again 20, 23 years.
23.
Are there any new Jans joining?
Oh, I hope so.
It's hard to get volunteers, really hard, especially nowadays because, you know, people are working one, two jobs.
You know, things are harder nowadays, really.
We've got a couple of people coming along.
I think it's more mindful than anything in trying to let things go.
I'm the worst one to delegate.
I give somebody a job to do.
You know, they're not doing it properly.
Give it to me, I'll do it.
I'll finish it all, I'll do it.
But we have started, we have to do one again, where we had a friends' tea, where it's a mixture of interested friends and parents.
And I think we need to work and persevere on that because otherwise, you know, no, there won't be another Jan.
And you've got to have another journal, you know, to have a pool of volunteers, you know, to take over for the future.
Well, I think we'll finish there.
Thank you very much.
Lost it.